README.md, before:

![Ruby CI builds](https://github.com/DocSpring/better_content_security_policy/actions/workflows/main.yml/badge.svg)

# Better Content Security Policy

This gem allows you to configure flexible and dynamic `Content-Security-Policy` headers for your Rails application.
By default, Rails only allows you to configure one global Content Security Policy for your whole application, in `config/initializers/content_security_policy.rb`. This gem moves the CSP logic into your controllers and views, so you can create multiple unique policies for different controllers, or add new rules for a specific action.

Read the MDN Web Docs to learn more about Content Security Policies: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP

## Features

- Configure unique `Content-Security-Policy` rules for different controllers and actions.
- Configure `Content-Security-Policy` rules alongside `script` tags in your views, so that rendering a view partial will automatically add all of the required CSP rules for those resources.
- Still uses some features from Rails, such as `Rails.application.config.content_security_policy_nonce_generator` to generate nonce values.

## Installation

Install the gem and add to the application's Gemfile by executing:

    $ bundle add better_content_security_policy

If bundler is not being used to manage dependencies, install the gem by executing:

    $ gem install better_content_security_policy

## Usage

Include the `BetterContentSecurityPolicy::HasContentSecurityPolicy` concern in your `ApplicationController`,
and the line `after_action :set_content_security_policy_header`.

```ruby
class ApplicationController < ActionController::Base
  include BetterContentSecurityPolicy::HasContentSecurityPolicy
  after_action :set_content_security_policy_header
```

Define a `#configure_content_security_policy` method in `ApplicationController` to configure the default `Content-Security-Policy` rules:

```ruby
  def configure_content_security_policy
    content_security_policy.default_src :none
    content_security_policy.font_src :self
    content_security_policy.script_src :self
    content_security_policy.style_src :self
    content_security_policy.img_src :self
    content_security_policy.connect_src :self
    content_security_policy.prefetch_src :self

    content_security_policy.report_uri = "http://example.com/csp_reports"
    content_security_policy.report_only = true
  end
```

You can define more `#configure_content_security_policy` methods in any other controllers. Call `super` if you want to inherit your default configuration from ApplicationController. Otherwise, you can omit the call to `super` if you want to start from scratch with a new policy.

You are now able to access content_security_policy in your controllers and views. After you have finished rendering the response, an `after_action` callback will generate and add the `Content-Security-Policy` header.

## Examples

#### Plausible Analytics

Here's an example `HAML` partial that includes the JavaScript snippet for [Plausible Analytics](https://plausible.io/).

```haml
# app/views/layouts/_plausible_analytics.html.haml

- if PLAUSIBLE_ANALYTICS_HOST
  - content_security_policy.connect_src PLAUSIBLE_ANALYTICS_HOST
  - content_security_policy.script_src PLAUSIBLE_ANALYTICS_HOST
  = javascript_include_tag "#{PLAUSIBLE_ANALYTICS_HOST}/js/script.js", defer: true, data: { domain: local_assigns[:domain].presence || request.host }
  = javascript_tag nonce: true do
    window.plausible = window.plausible || function() { (window.plausible.q = window.plausible.q || []).push(arguments) }
```

Whenever this view partial is rendered, the connect-src and script-src directives will be automatically added to your `Content-Security-Policy` header.

#### Gravatar Images

You can also override any helper methods that add resources from external sites, and update them so that they will automatically add the required `Content-Security-Policy` rules. Here's the overridden helper method that I use to generate Gravatar image URLs:

```ruby
  def gravatar_image_url(email, options = {})
    content_security_policy.img_src 'https://secure.gravatar.com'
    content_security_policy.img_src 'https://*.wp.com'
    super
  end
```

> Note: It's fine to call this method multiple times. Any duplicate entries are automatically removed.

## Nonces

This gem does not need to provide any extra functionality for working with `nonce` values. You can still set up the Rails nonce generator in `config/initializers/content_security_policy.rb`:

```ruby

Rails.application.config.content_security_policy_nonce_generator = ->(_request) { SecureRandom.base64(16) }
```

The Rails `content_security_policy?` method will return false since we are not using the CSP feature from Rails, so the `csp_meta_tag` helper will not work. You will need to create the meta tag manually:

```
<%= tag("meta", name: "csp-nonce", content: content_security_policy_nonce) %>
```

You must also manually set up the `nonce-*` value in your `#configure_content_security_policy` method:

```ruby
  def configure_content_security_policy
    content_security_policy.script_src :self, "nonce-#{content_security_policy_nonce}"
    # ...
```

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and the created tag, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/DocSpring/better_content_security_policy. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere to the [code of conduct](https://github.com/DocSpring/better_content_security_policy/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

## Code of Conduct

Everyone interacting in the BetterContentSecurityPolicy project's codebases, issue trackers, chat rooms and mailing lists is expected to follow the [code of conduct](https://github.com/DocSpring/better_content_security_policy/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

Commit message:

refactor: mention HTML-only requests

README.md, after:

![Ruby CI builds](https://github.com/DocSpring/better_content_security_policy/actions/workflows/main.yml/badge.svg)

# Better Content Security Policy

This gem allows you to configure flexible and dynamic `Content-Security-Policy` headers for your Rails application.
By default, Rails only allows you to configure one global Content Security Policy for your whole application, in `config/initializers/content_security_policy.rb`. This gem moves the CSP logic into your controllers and views, so you can create multiple unique policies for different controllers, or add new rules for a specific action.

Read the MDN Web Docs to learn more about Content Security Policies: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP

## Features

- Configure unique `Content-Security-Policy` rules for different controllers and actions.
- Configure `Content-Security-Policy` rules alongside `script` tags in your views, so that rendering a view partial will automatically add all of the required CSP rules for those resources.
- Still uses some features from Rails, such as `Rails.application.config.content_security_policy_nonce_generator` to generate nonce values.

## Installation

Install the gem and add to the application's Gemfile by executing:

    $ bundle add better_content_security_policy

If bundler is not being used to manage dependencies, install the gem by executing:

    $ gem install better_content_security_policy

## Usage

Include the `BetterContentSecurityPolicy::HasContentSecurityPolicy` concern in your `ApplicationController`,
and the line `after_action :set_content_security_policy_header`.

```ruby
class ApplicationController < ActionController::Base
  include BetterContentSecurityPolicy::HasContentSecurityPolicy
  after_action :set_content_security_policy_header
```

If your application also serves non-HTML requests, such as JSON, you may want to restrict the
callback to HTML-only:

```ruby
   after_action :set_content_security_policy_header, if: -> { request.format.html? }
```

Define a `#configure_content_security_policy` method in `ApplicationController` to configure the default `Content-Security-Policy` rules:

```ruby
  def configure_content_security_policy
    content_security_policy.default_src :none
    content_security_policy.font_src :self
    content_security_policy.script_src :self
    content_security_policy.style_src :self
    content_security_policy.img_src :self
    content_security_policy.connect_src :self
    content_security_policy.prefetch_src :self

    content_security_policy.report_uri = "http://example.com/csp_reports"
    content_security_policy.report_only = true
  end
```

You can define more `#configure_content_security_policy` methods in any other controllers. Call `super` if you want to inherit your default configuration from ApplicationController. Otherwise, you can omit the call to `super` if you want to start from scratch with a new policy.

You are now able to access content_security_policy in your controllers and views. After you have finished rendering the response, an `after_action` callback will generate and add the `Content-Security-Policy` header.

## Examples

#### Plausible Analytics

Here's an example `HAML` partial that includes the JavaScript snippet for [Plausible Analytics](https://plausible.io/).

```haml
# app/views/layouts/_plausible_analytics.html.haml

- if PLAUSIBLE_ANALYTICS_HOST
  - content_security_policy.connect_src PLAUSIBLE_ANALYTICS_HOST
  - content_security_policy.script_src PLAUSIBLE_ANALYTICS_HOST
  = javascript_include_tag "#{PLAUSIBLE_ANALYTICS_HOST}/js/script.js", defer: true, data: { domain: local_assigns[:domain].presence || request.host }
  = javascript_tag nonce: true do
    window.plausible = window.plausible || function() { (window.plausible.q = window.plausible.q || []).push(arguments) }
```

Whenever this view partial is rendered, the connect-src and script-src directives will be automatically added to your `Content-Security-Policy` header.

#### Gravatar Images

You can also override any helper methods that add resources from external sites, and update them so that they will automatically add the required `Content-Security-Policy` rules. Here's the overridden helper method that I use to generate Gravatar image URLs:

```ruby
  def gravatar_image_url(email, options = {})
    content_security_policy.img_src 'https://secure.gravatar.com'
    content_security_policy.img_src 'https://*.wp.com'
    super
  end
```

> Note: It's fine to call this method multiple times. Any duplicate entries are automatically removed.

## Nonces

This gem does not need to provide any extra functionality for working with `nonce` values. You can still set up the Rails nonce generator in `config/initializers/content_security_policy.rb`:

```ruby

Rails.application.config.content_security_policy_nonce_generator = ->(_request) { SecureRandom.base64(16) }
```

The Rails `content_security_policy?` method will return false since we are not using the CSP feature from Rails, so the `csp_meta_tag` helper will not work. You will need to create the meta tag manually:

```
<%= tag("meta", name: "csp-nonce", content: content_security_policy_nonce) %>
```

You must also manually set up the `nonce-*` value in your `#configure_content_security_policy` method:

```ruby
  def configure_content_security_policy
    content_security_policy.script_src :self, "nonce-#{content_security_policy_nonce}"
    # ...
```

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and the created tag, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/DocSpring/better_content_security_policy. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere to the [code of conduct](https://github.com/DocSpring/better_content_security_policy/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

## Code of Conduct

Everyone interacting in the BetterContentSecurityPolicy project's codebases, issue trackers, chat rooms and mailing lists is expected to follow the [code of conduct](https://github.com/DocSpring/better_content_security_policy/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
